Abstract:   
Introduction: Diagnosing Parkinson's Disease (PD) early and effectively, is a prevalent issue. Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non-invasive technique that is used to identify neurological abnormalities, which are linked to PD. Recent advances in EEG-based machine learning, including Transformer-based architectures, have improved the pattern detection to further the diagnosis of PD, but are still challenged when generalizing among diverse patient populations.

Objective: To determine how different fine-tuning strategies, like Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), can impact the robustness and generalizability of the TransformEEG model for PD detection.

Background: Currently, a large number of EEG-based models that are used for PD diagnosis depend on supervised learning using relatively small, expertly labelled datasets. This limits scalability and raises the possibility of overfitting. While models like TransformEEG are a step forward, their reliance on labelled data still restricts their clinical applications.

Methods: The model’s performance is evaluated over multiple fine-tuning strategies, like full fine-tuning, LoRA fine-tuning, and partial fine-tuning, using the same labeled Parkinson’s disease EEG datasets from the original TransformEEG study. We determined how the constrained parameter updates, like the low-ranked matrices in LoRA, influence the learned representations and generalizations in our datasets. Finally, the performance is evaluated on accuracy, sensitivity, and precision, allowing a direct comparison with the original study’s model.

Results:

Conclusion: This study analyzes how fine-tuning strategies, such as parameter-efficient methods like LoRA, can affect the generalizability of transformer-based EEG models for Parkinson’s disease detection, where \[best performed strategy\] has the strongest balance between its performance and robustness.

Introduction: Karolina

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is one of the most common incurable neurodegenerative brain condition that contributes to complications with movement, mental health, sleep, pain, and other health issues (World Health Organization, 2019). Early and accurate diagnosis is a major problem due to the lack of consistency of symptoms among PD patients (Rizzo et al., 2016). In the past 25 years, there were over 8.5 million individuals afflicted by PD globally, with deaths increasing over 100% to 329,000 since 2000 (World Health Organization, 2019). At least 1% of individuals over the age of 60 worldwide have PD, showing its urgency for early detection (Cleveland Clinic, n.d). Correspondingly, electroencephalography (EEG) has shown to be a reliable and promising way to identify PD early on (Jinob et al., 2024). 

Despite this, there are still gaps in generalizability and interpretability with EEG models (Adablanu et al., 2025). A solution to this issue was creating TransformEEG (T.EEG) to improve the generalizability through the use of channel-specific tokenizers (Del Pup et al., 2025). While it improved over traditional deep learning models, a fault with T.EEG is that it depends on only four labeled Parkinson’s datasets through its supervised learning rather than a large amount of data to train on. Therefore, due to its limited variability, T.EEG is susceptible to overfitting causing inaccuracies in data interpretation (Del Pup et al., 2025).

With this in mind, larger labeled EEG datasets would need to address the overfitting problem. Due to the expertise required in labeling this data, the process is expensive, limited, and time-consuming for professionals to produce (Chen et al., 2018). To address this financial burden created, it first becomes important to understand how different fine-tuning approaches affect model generalization when only small labeled datasets are available. Some more recent approaches, such as parameter-efficient fine-tuning models and LoRA, aim to alleviate the issue by constraining the model updates learning low-rank matrices while fixing most of the pretrained model. However, it is unclear if these updates improve generalization or hinder the model’s ability to adapt to new EEG patterns, especially for Parkinson’s disease detection.

Our research suggests that alternative methods are required to address the aforementioned issues of generalizability, interpretability, and cost-effectiveness. Instead of adding new data with pretraining, we want to study systematically the effect of fine-tuning strategies on model behavior. We use T.EEG’s four PD datasets to compare full fine-tuning, LoRA fine-tuning, and partial fine-tuning approaches, allowing us to isolate the effect of each method on their performance and generalization. This allows us to better understand what situations fine-tuning leads to more robust models and when it causes overfitting in EEG-based Parkinson’s detection models, where \[whichever approach works best for small datasets \+ its limitations\] might be better than other methods depending on the amount of constraint used.

Related Works: Inesh   
Parkinson’s Disease Detection has been a growing field with constant challenges that have slowly been solved through the use of EEG detection. One of the major problems with detection is early and accurate diagnosis, as there is a lack of consistency with symptoms in patients that leads to it being harder to identify neurological changes (Rizzo et al., 2016). Medical detection with EEG machine learning models became a reliable way to analyze disease, yet also faced significant problems with generalizability due to scarce datasets and ethical concerns (Adablanu et al., 2025). TransformEEG (Del Pup et al., 2025\) became one of the biggest innovators in the field by creating a hybrid convolutional transformer with tokenization that allowed for a 78.45% balanced accuracy in Parkinson’s Disease Detection. The only drawback to this was the reliance on four very small labeled datasets, ds004148 (Wang et al., 2022), ds002778 (Rockhill et al., 2021), ds003490 (Cavanagh, 2021), and ds004584 (Singh et al., 2023), which caused limitations in scaling as well as a risk of overfitting due to their small size.

While a larger amount of data has been one way to improve model performance, another important factor is how the models are fine-tuned on limited labeled datasets. When fine-tuning large neural networks, not using constraints can result in overfitting, especially in areas like EEG, where the data is highly variable, and datasets are small (Chen et al., 2018). To this end, parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods like LoRA have been proposed to update low-ranked matrices only, which reduces the number of trainable parameters while keeping the model’s original structure. However, the impact of LoRA on EEG-based models and its clinical generalizability remain largely unexplored, despite the successful application of it in other transformer-based domains. In particular, there is limited understanding of its effects of low-rank updates on learned representations, cross-dataset performance, and robustness in the context of detection tasks with Parkinson’s disease.

Our project developes novelty by systematic analysis of fine-tuning behavior in the TransformEEG model. We compare full fine-tuning, LoRA updates, and partial fine-tuning on the same four labeled datasets (Wang et al., 2022; Rockhill et al., 2021; Cavanagh 2021; Singh et al., 2023\) to highlight the impact of different adaptation strategies on generalization. \[The method that has the most consistent accuracy\] shows the most consistent cross-dataset performance. Unlike previous studies, focusing mainly on performance enhancement, we are interested in understanding the mechanisms of fine-tuning and its impact on the robustness of EEG models in the clinical setting.

Methods: Johnathan 

We utilized four publicly available datasets containing labeled EEG data to train our model. Our approach is based on the analysis of different fine-tuning strategies. The datasets for our finetuning phase were the same as those utilized by the original TransformEEG used, from OpenNeuro. These included ds004148, ds002778, ds003490, and ds004584. By using the same datasets, we can accurately see and isolate the effects of different fine-tuning strategies on the model’s generalizability. 

For our experiments, we used a modified version of the original T.EEG architecture, where we applied different fine-tuning methods and analyzed their influence on the model performance. Approaches such as LoRA were integrated to impose constraints on the model updates. In addition to LoRA fine-tuning, we also experimented with full fine-tuning and partial fine-tuning, which enabled us to analyze the effect of different levels of parameter updates on generalization. By applying these, we reduce the chance that our model memorizes certain patterns, to again improve its generalizability. 

Our model uses an SSL encoder wrapper that wraps the basemodel to expose only the encoder portion of the original TransformEEG model, which was initiated with 61 EEG channels and 244 feature dimensions. The wrapper consists of three main parts, with the token generator, which converts \[B,C,T\] to tokens \[B, F, S\]. Then they are passed through the transformer to output latent features, which are then passed through a pooling layer. Then, through the SelfEEG library, we use the SimCLR SSL method, which uses contrastive learning to differentiate between similar and different EEG data. We use the SimCLR loss from the SelfEEG library and a temperature of 0.5. Then we have an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 2.5x10^-5 and betas of 0.75 and 0.999. Our learning rate scheduler is set with a gamma of 0.99 or a 1% decrease per epoch. Then, to prevent overfitting, we utilized an early stopper set to stop after 30 epochs if there isn’t a minimum change of 1x10^-4. We train on our pretraining dataset for over 300 epochs. 

Once the model is initialized, we apply the selected fine-tuning strategy (full, LoRA, or partial) and train directly on the labeled datasets. We apply the same augmentations that the original TransformEEG paper used to ensure fairness when comparing the two. Then, we define a binary-cross entropy loss function with logits. Our early stop uses a patience of 20 with a similar minimum change of 1x10-4. Our optimizer and learning rate scheduler are set to the exact same hyperparameters as we utilized during pretraining. We also use 300 epochs to train over the finetuning datasets. 

Once we’ve finished finetuning, we evaluate our model using the same functions the TransformEEG paper utilized. Specifically, we use balanced accuracy, which is the mean of the sensitivity and specificity. We evaluate on two granularities: window-level and subject-level. Window-level means to evaluate the model on its performance with individual windows or segments. On the other hand, subject-level looks at the model’s final label decision based on the combination of all the windows of one subject.   We used both a fixed 0.5 threshold and an ROC-optimized threshold. 

Results:

Discussion: 

We conduct a study on the impact of different fine-tuning strategies for the clinical EEG classification of Parkinspn’s patients. The original model reported a median balanced accuracy of 78.45% which increases to 80.10% with data augmentations and threshold correction. For an overall comparison, our pretrained model achieved \_\_\_\_ on a window-level while on a subject level it performed \_\_\_\_\_. The contrast in results demonstrates that contrastive learning on a large unlabeled EEG dataset could \_\_\_\_\_. We found the most apparent improvements in \_\_\_(subject or window level), showing that the representations capture subject-level neural details \_\_\_\_ than short term signal patterns. 

A big reason our model improved came from how parameter updates in the network are controlled by various fine-tuning strategies. Full fine-tuning adapts all parameters of the model. This can improve performance but is also more prone to overfitting on dataset noise. In contrast, LoRA fine-tuning limits its updates to low-ranked matrices, which guides the model to maintain generalizable features while its fine-tuning to the new data. We allow the model to keep the stable representations learned from the original architecture by using restricted parameter updates instead of unconstrained learning, and to selectively adapt to new patterns in the EEG data. This helped to keep the network temporal and frequency-based information as it normally generalizes across patients. This is different from just memorizing the dataset specific noise or artifacts as it allows for the fine-tuning to work on a more well structured feature space. Due to this, we were able to lower the risk of overfitting and improve the model’s performance with smaller labeled datasets. When working with EEG data, this is huge as it can normally have high variability and limitations that lower the amount of labeled data that is usable. 

The original TransformEEG paper had a framework which was only trained with supervised learning on small labelled datasets. Our new approach analyzes the effects of different fine-tuning strategies on model behavior, without changing the original training data. This allows us to analyze the impact of the degree of the parameter flexibility on its performance and generalization. We focus on optimizing the way the model learns from existing datasets while having it maintain a strong architecture.

When looking at a clinical perspective, it is highly important to see subject-level improvements, as, instead of looking at smaller segments of EEGs, the model is able to see everything belonging to a patient the same way a real doctor would and make a diagnosis. Developments at this level are huge to keep the model realistic for a real-world scenario and prepare it for deployment in clinics. Our results showed that at a subject-level, the model \_\_\_\_\_\_\_. This improvement in the subject-level supports that the choice of our strategy was an important step towards improving the model’s capability in real-world clinical scenarios and allows for a more robust model that can handle more realistic medical situations.

There are several limitations that could be addressed in order to improve the model in the future and develop it further. One of the biggest limitations came from the difference across datasets, as the sampling rates, channel montages, and hardware differences between the datasets used by TransformEEG may have caused the model to learn specific dataset attributes. Another problem is that constrained fine-tuning techniques like LoRA might limit the model’s capacity to adapt depending on the chosen layer and rank placement. The pre-processing forced the data to the same channel count through channel selection, which may have discarded important information, causing the model to have a bias towards dataset-specific channel specifications. Lastly, the computational limits caused us to be unable to change more components of the model to observe their effects. These key limitations could be worked on in the future to improve the work and create further development in the clinical scene.

Future work could use more datasets for fine-tuning and evaluation to improve variability and model generalizability. Alternatively, one can investigate other parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques, as well as different LoRA settings, to achieve a better understanding of their influence on the performance of EEG models. Along with these, running experiments on datasets that have the same channel specifications could be integrated in order to reduce information loss and dataset-specific bias that may have appeared in our model.

Limitations: Jithin

The model has several limitations which could be addressed in the potential future. The first point to mention is the difference in data distributions between the datasets used during fine-tuning. Sampling rates, channel montages, and hardware differences between the datasets utilized by the Transform EEG paper may have resulted in the model learning dataset specific attributes. Along with this, patient details may differ in age, health status, and recording conditions. As a result, there exists a possibility for a domain shift which affects the overall generality of what the model has learned. Second, to make all datasets compatible for pre-processing, data has been forced to the same channel count through channel selection. Although this simplifies the requirements for the model’s input, it discards important information regarding details like the spacing of the electrodes on the patient’s scalp. This may increase the model’s bias towards dataset-specific channel specifications. Third, constrained fine-tuning methods like LoRA may limit the model’s ability to fully adapt to complex EEG patterns depending on the chosen layer placement and rank. Next, restriction to parameter updates might reduce overfitting, but it can also prevent the model from capturing subtle variations in data. Finally, computational limits resulted in fewer opportunities for changing components of the model to observe the effect. The model results represent a cost and time-efficient setup, not one which has optimized to its best capability. 

Conclusion:

In this paper, we provide a systematic analysis of fine-tuning strategies for transformer-based EEG models for the detection of Parkinson’s disease. We assess the impact of different parameter update mechanisms on generalization and robustness by comparing full fine-tuning, LoRA updates and partial fine-tuning. The model works with multichannel EEG files without manually finding features from the graphs. The main contributions of our study is the analysis of the role of parameter-efficient fine-tuning on model performance and the discovery of balance between flexibility and generalization. Model predictions on EEG windows of fixed length are used to ensure the model’s results are aligned with medically reliable decisions. Along with this, our analysis brings attention to how different fine-tuning strategies affect the model’s generalization across datasets. Due to this, we highlight the importance of properly choosing fine-tuning methods for EEG-based models. 

(**ADD METRICS SECTION HERE)** 

The model is meant to provide a foundation for future work on fine-tuning strategies for EEG-based models and illustrated how they can be applied to medical scenarios, especially involving brain-scan data. Future work should explore more fine-tuning strategies and parameter constraints for EEG datasets. Along with this, datasets used should be similar in channel specifications in order to reduce loss of important EEG data. Finally, future work should look deeper into the effects of parameter update constraints and changes in model architecture to verify the differences in how the model learns and its outcomes.